This repository contains data and code used for microbiota analyses in our manuscript investigating the role of inflammation in susceptiblity to C.difficile colonization in mice with inflammatory bowel disease.

# Title:

Authors:

Note: Pipeline for mothur analyses can be found here: https://github.com/barronmr/mothurPipeline  

Abstract: The indigenous gut microbiota interacts with the host to resist colonization by the bacterial pathogen, Clostridioides difficile. Perturbations to the microbiota, generally resulting from broad spectrum antibiotic treatment, creates an environment permissive to C. difficile growth. Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are at increased risk for <C. difficile> infection, even in the absence of antibiotics, though mechanisms underlying this susceptibility are not well understood. To explore these mechanisms, we recently developed a mouse model where C. difficile colonization occurs in the setting of IBD without the need for antibiotic-induced microbiota alterations. In this model, IBD is induced by colonizing mice deficient in interleukin 10 (IL-10) signaling with Helicobacter hepaticus, a member of the murine gut microbiota that triggers colitis in hosts with altered immune regulation. Using this system, we demonstrated that intestinal inflammation coupled with changes in microbiota composition were sufficient to render colitic mice susceptible to colonization by C. difficile.  Here, we build on this work to disentangle the relative contributions of inflammation and the microbiota in IBD-mediated C. difficile colonization. Coupling computational modeling with experiments in SPF and gnotobiotic mice, we demonstrate that inflammation triggers changes in the composition of the gut microbiota, which in turn play a primary role in driving susceptibility to C. difficile in the setting of IBD. We show that mitigating inflammation by treating colitic mice with anti-p40 monoclonal antibody, a clinically relevant IBD therapeutic, promotes a shift of the microbiota back toward a colonization resistant state. Collectively, our findings shine new light on the host-microbiota interface as it relates to resistance to C. difficile infection and IBD. Ultimately, such knowledge could aide in the development of strategies to prevent or treat infection in IBD patients. 
